.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright 2005, by Shaul Karl.
.\" Copyright 2010, by Joachim Nilsson.
.\"
.\" You may modify and distribute this document for any purpose, as
.\" long as this copyright notice remains intact.
.\"
.Dd November 27, 2013
.Dt INADYN 5 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm inadyn.conf
.Nd inadyn DDNS client configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/inadyn.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm inadyn
is configured using a simple configuration file.  The
.Dq #\&
character marks start of a comment to end of line.  The \\ character can
be used as an escape character.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM
.It Cm fake-address = <true | false>
When using SIGUSR1, to do a forced update, this option can be used to
fake an address update with a
.Dq random
address in the 203.0.113.0/24 range, example address range from RFC5737,
before updating with the actual IP address.  This is completely outside
spec., but can be useful for people who very rarely, if ever, get an IP
address change.  Because some DDNS service providers will not register
even a forced update if the IP is the same.  As a result the user could
be deregistered as an inactive user.
.It Cm iface = IFNAME
Use network interface
.Nm IFNAME
as source of IP address changes instead of querying an external server.
With this option is enabled, the external IP check is disabled and
.Nm inadyn
will send DDNS updates using the IP address of the
.Nm IFNAME
network interface to
.Em all
DDNS providers listed in the configuration file.  This can be useful to
register LAN IP addresses, or, when connected directly to a public IP
address, to speed up the IP check if the DDNS provider's check-ip
servers are slow to respond.
.Pp
This option can also be given as a command line option to
.Xr inadyn 8 ,
both serve a purpose, use whichever one works for you.
.It Cm cache-dir = PATH
Set directory for persistent cache files, defaults to
.Pa /var/cache/inadyn
.Pp
The cache files are used to keep track of which addresses have been
successfully sent to their respective DDNS provider and when.  The
latter 'when' is important to prevent
.Nm
from banning you for excessive updates.
.Pp
When restarting
.Nm
or rebooting your server, or embedded device,
.Nm
reads the cache files to seed its internal data structures with the last
sent IP address and when the update was performed.  It is therefore very
important to both have a cache file and for it to have the correct time
stamp.  The absence of a cache file will currently cause a forced
update.
.Pp
On an embedded device with no RTC, or no battery backed RTC, it is
strongly recommended to pair this setting with the
.Fl -startup-delay=SEC
command line option.
.It Cm iterations = <NUM | 0>
Set the number of DNS updates. The default is
.Ar 0 ,
which means infinity.
.It Cm period = SEC
How often the IP is checked, in seconds. Default: apx 1 minute. Max: 10 days.
.It Cm forced-update = SEC
How often the IP should be updated even if it is not changed. The time
should be given in seconds.  Default is equal to 30 days.
.It Cm custom randomUserID {}
.It Cm provider email@ddns-service.tld[:ID] {}
The custom{} and provider{} sections are very similar, except that the
custom section allows specifying checkip-server and ddns-server details.
.Pp
To support multiple users of the same DDNS provider, append
.Pa [:ID]
to the provider name.  The
.Pa ID
can be any free form string or number as long as the combination is
unique.
.Pp
Common settings in custom{} and provider{} sections are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It Cm ssl = <true | false>
Use HTTPS to connect to this DDNS service provider, default HTTP (false).
.It Cm username = USERNAME.
The username, if applicable.  This might be referred to as hash by some providers.
.It Cm password = PASSWORD
The password, if applicable.
.It Cm checkip-server = checkip.example.com[:port]
Server to use for periodic IP address changes,
.Pa port
defaults to
.Ar 80 .
.Pp
.Pa Note:
This is an optional setting for
.Cm provider{}
sections, which always have a default
.Cm checkip-server
and
.Cm checkip-path
defined.  For custom DDNS setups however it is required.  When set in a
.Cm provider{}
section it overrides the provider's default
.Cm checkip-server .
.It Cm checkip-path = "/some/checkip/url"
Optional server path for check IP server, defaults to "/".
.It Cm hostname = HOSTNAME
.It Cm hostname = { "HOSTNAME1.name.tld", "HOSTNAME2.name.tld" }
Your hostname alias.  To list multiple names, use the second form.
.It Cm wildcard = true
Enable domain name wildcarding of your domain name, for DDNS providers
that support this, e.g. easydns.com and loopia.com.  This means that
anything typed before your hostname, e.g. www. or ftp., is also updated
when your IP changes.  Default: disabled.  For
.Nm inadyn
< 1.96.3 wildcarding was enabled by default.
.El
.It Cm provider email@ddns-service.tld {}
Can be one of:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It Cm default@dyndns.org
Connect to
.Aq http://www.dyndns.org ,
this is the default.
.It Cm default@freedns.afraid.org
.Aq http://freedns.afraid.org
.It Cm default@zoneedit.com
.Aq http://zoneedit.com
.It Cm default@no-ip.com
.Aq http://www.no-ip.com
.It Cm default@easydns.com
.Aq http://www.easydns.com
.It Cm default@tzo.com
.Aq http://www.tzo.com
.It Cm dyndns@3322.org
.Aq http://www.3322.org
.It Cm default@dnsomatic.com
.Aq http://www.dnsomatic.com
.It Cm dyndns@he.net
.Aq http://dns.he.net
.It Cm default@tunnelbroker.net
IPv6
.Aq https://www.tunnelbroker.net
by Hurricane Electric.
.It Cm default@dynsip.org
.Aq http://www.dynsip.org
.It Cm default@sitelutions.com
.Aq http://www.sitelutions.com
.It Cm default@dnsexit.com
.Aq http://www.dnsexit.com
.It Cm default@changeip.com
.Aq http://www.changeip.com
.It Cm default@zerigo.com
.Aq http://www.zerigo.com
.It Cm default@dhis.org
.Aq http://www.dhis.org
.It Cm ipv4@nsupdate.info
.Aq https://nsupdate.info
.It Cm default@duckdns.org
.Aq http://duckdns.org
.It Cm default@loopia.com
.Aq https://www.loopia.com
.It Cm default@duiadns.net
.Aq https://www.duiadns.net
.El
.It Cm custom some@identifier {}
Specific to the custom provider section are the following settings:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It Cm ddns-server = update.example.com
DDNS server name, not the full URL.
.It Cm ddns-path   = "/update?domain="
DDNS server path.  By default the hostname is appended to the path,
unless
.Cm append-myip=true
is set.
.It Cm append-myip = true
Append your current IP to the the DDNS server update path.
.El
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Notice how two different user accounts access the same DDNS provider, No-IP.com
.Pp
period         = 300
.br
cache-dir      = /etc/inadyn
.Pp
# Dyn.com
.br
provider default@dyndns.org {
.br
    ssl        = true
.br
    username   = account1
.br
    password   = secret1
.br
    hostname   = { "my.example.com", "other.example.org" }
.br
}
.Pp
# No-IP.com #1
.br
provider default@no-ip.com:1 {
.br
    username   = account21
.br
    password   = secret21
.br
    hostname   = example.no-ip.com
.br
}
.Pp
# No-IP.com #2
.br
provider default@no-ip.com:2 {
.br
    username   = account22
.br
    password   = secret22
.br
    hostname   = another.no-ip.com
.br
}
.Pp
# Loopia
.br
provider default@loopia.com {
.br
    ssl        = true
.br
    wildcard   = true
.br
    username   = account3
.br
    password   = secret3
.br
    hostname   = example.com
.br
}
.Pp
# ddnss.de
.br
provider default@ddnss.de {
.br
    ssl        = true
.br
    username   = your_username
.br
    password   = your_password
.br
    hostname   = your_host.ddnss.de
.br
}
.Pp
# dynv6.com
.br
provider default@dynv6.com {
.br
    username   = your_token
.br
    password   = not_used
.br
    hostname   = your_host.dynv6.net
.br
}
.Pp
# IPv6 account at https://tunnelbroker.net
.br
provider default@tunnelbroker.net {
.br
    ssl        = true
.br
    username   = xyzzy
.br
    password   = update-key-in-advanced-tab
.br
    hostname   = tunnel-id
.br
}
.Pp
# Generic example for twoDNS.de
.br
custom twoDNS.de {
.br
    ssl            = true
.br
    username       = account4
.br
    password       = secret4
.br
    checkip-server = checkip.two-dns.de
    checkip-path   = /
.br
    ddns-server    = update.twodns.de
.br
    ddns-path      = "/update?hostname="
.br
    hostname       = example.dd-dns.de
.br
}
.Pp
As of Inadyn 1.99.14 the generic plugin can also be used with providers
that require the client's IP in the update request, which for example
.Aq http://dyn.com
requires:
.Pp
# This emulates default@dyndns.org
.br
custom dyn.com {
.br
    ssl          = true
.br
    username     = DYNUSERNAME
.br
    password     = DYNPASSWORD
.br
    ddns-server  = members.dyndns.org
.br
    ddns-path    = "/nic/update?hostname=YOURHOST.dyndns.org&myip="
.br
    append-myip  = true
.br
    hostname     = YOURHOST
.br
}
.Pp
Notice the use of
.Nm append-myip
which differs from above previous examples.  Without this option set the
default (backwards compatible) behavior is to add the hostname.
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr inadyn 8
.Pp
The
.Nm inadyn
home page is
.Aq http://github.com/troglobit/inadyn
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was initially written for the
.Em Debian GNU/Linux
system by
.An -nosplit
.An Shaul Karl Aq mailto:shaul@debian.org .
Currently maintained by
.An -nosplit
.An Joachim Nilsson Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com .
