.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright 2004, by Shaul Karl.
.\" Copyright 2010, by Joachim Nilsson.
.\"
.\" You may modify and distribute this document for any purpose, as
.\" long as this copyright notice remains intact.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 31 2010 $
.Dt INADYN 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm inadyn
.Nd A small DDNS client that helps maintain your presence on the Internet.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm inadyn
.Bk
.Op Fl h,--help
.Op Fl u,--username Ar username
.Op Fl p,--password Ar password
.Op Fl a,--alias Ar alias[,hash]
.Op Fl -input_file Ar config_file
.Op Fl -ip_server_name Ar server[:port] url
.Op Fl -dyndns_server_name Ar name[:port]
.Op Fl -dyndns_system Ar service
.Op Fl -proxy_server Ar proxy[:port]
.Op Fl -update_period Ar msec
.Op Fl -update_period_sec Ar sec
.Op Fl -forced_update_period Ar sec
.Op Fl -log_file Ar log_file
.Op Fl -background
.Op Fl -verbose Ar level
.Op Fl -iterations Ar num
.Op Fl -change_persona Ar uid[:gid]
.Op Fl -syslog
.Op Fl -bind_interface Ar ifname
.Op Fl -pifdile Ar pid_file
.Op Fl -exec Ar exec_script
.Op Fl -wildcard
.Ek
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm inadyn
is a client for `open' name servers, also known as DDNS service providers.  That is,
it lets you have an Internet name for your DHCP/PPPoE assigned system.  Some of these
services are free of charge for non-commercial use, others take a small fee, but also
provide more domains to chose from.
.Pp
Common DDNS service providers supported by
.Nm inayn:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
http://www.dyndns.org
.It
http://freedns.afraid.org
.It
http://zoneedit.com
.It
http://www.no-ip.com
.It
http://www.easydns.com
.It
http://www.tzo.com
.It
http://www.3322.org
.It
http://www.dnsomatic.com
.It
http://www.tunnelbroker.net, i.e., http://dns.he.net/
.El
.Pp
The basic operation of
.Nm inadyn
is to periodically check whether the actual Internet accessible IP of your system is
the same one that is recorded in the name server, and update the name server records
when there is a mismatch.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h, -help
Print a summary of the options to
.Nm inadyn
and exit.
.It Fl u, -username Ar username
The username, if applicable. This might be referred to as hash.
.It Fl p, -password Ar password
The password, if applicable.
.It Fl a, -alias Ar alias[,hash]
A host name alias. This option can appear multiple times, for each
domain that has the same IP.
.It Fl -input_file AR config_file
The file name that contains inadyn command options exactly as specified in
the command line syntax (adds to those already present on the cmd
line). The default configuration file name is 
.Pa /etc/inadyn.conf
. It is looked at automatically if
.Nm inadyn
is called without any command line options. The format is as expected
for a UN*X config file; the hash character is used to comment entire
lines.  Spaces are ingored.  The long options may be specified without
\-\- if placed at the beginning of the line.
.It Fl -ip_server_name Ar server[:port] url
The client IP is detected by calling 'url' from this 'server:port'.
Defaults to http://checkip.dyndns.org /
.TP
.It Fl -dyndns_server_name Ar name[:port]
The server that receives the update DNS requests.  When no proxy is specified it is
sufficient to set the dyndns_system so that the default servers will be taken. The
option is useful for generic DynDNS services that support HTTP update.
.It Fl -dyndns_server_url path
The update path on the DynDNS server.
.It Fl -dyndns_system Ar email@ddns-service.tld
DNS service to connect to.  Defaults to dyndns@dyndns.org
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact -offset indent
.It Cm dyndns@dyndns.org
http://www.dyndns.org
.It Cm statdns@dyndns.org
http://www.dyndns.org
.It Cm custom@dyndns.org
http://www.dyndns.org
.It Cm default@freedns.afraid.org
http://freedns.afraid.org
.It Cm default@zoneedit.com
http://zoneedit.com
.It Cm default@no-ip.com
http://www.no-ip.com
.It Cm default@easydns.com
http://www.easydns.com
.It Cm default@tzo.com
http://www.tzo.com
.It Cm dyndns@3322.org
http://www.3322.org
.It Cm default@dnsomatic.com
http://www.dnsomatic.com
.It Cm ipv6tb@he.net
http://www.tunnelbroker.net, i.e., http://dns.he.net/
.It Cm custom@http_svr_basic_auth
.El
.It Fl -proxy_server Ar proxy[:port]
An HTTP proxy server name and port. The default is none.
.It Fl -update_period Ar msec
How often the IP is checked. This value is in milliseconds (there are
1000 milliseconds in one second).  The default is about 1 minute. The
maximum is 10 days.
.It Fl -update_period_sec Ar sec
How often the IP is checked. Here the value denotes seconds. The default
is about 1 minute. The maximum value is 10 days.
.It Fl -forced_update_period Ar sec
How often the IP should be updated even if it is not changed. The time
should be given in seconds.
.It Fl -log_file Ar log_file
The name, including the full path, of a log file.  See also the --syslog option, below.
.It Fl -background
Run in background. Output is sent to the UNIX syslog facilities
or to a log file, if one was specified.
.It Fl -verbose Ar level
Set the debug level, which is an integer between 0 to 5.
.TP
.I \-\-iterations <NUM>
Set the number of DNS updates. The default is 0, which means infinity.
.TP
.I \-\-syslog
Use the system
.RB syslog(3)
mechanism for log messages, warnings and error conditions.
.It Fl -change_persona Ar uid[:gid]
After init changes user ID and group ID to the provided ones. This allows dropping unneeded [root] privileges after startup.
.It Fl -bind_iface Ar ifname
Set interface to bind to. Works on UN*X systems only.
.It Fl -pidfile pid_file
Set pidfile, defaults to
.Pa /var/run/inadyn.pid.
.It Fl -exec exec_script
Full path to external command, or script, to run after an IP update.
.It Fl -wildcard
Enable domain name wildcarding for dyndns.org, 3322.org, or easydns.com. Default
disabled. For inadyn < 1.96.3 wildcarding was enabled by default.
.Sh "TYPICAL USAGE"
.Ss http://www.dyndns.org
.Nm inadyn
.No -u username -p password -a my.registered.name
.Pp
.Nm inadyn
.No --username test --password test --update_period 60000
.No --alias test.homeip.net --alias my.second.domain
.Pp
.Nm inadyn
.No ---background -u test -p test --update_period 60000
.No ---alias inarcis.homeip.net --alias my.second.domain
.No --log_file inadyn_srv.log
.Ss http://freedns.afraid.org
.Nm inadyn
.No --dyndns_service default@freedns.afraid.org -a my.registrated.name,hash_from_freedns
.Pp
.Nm inadyn
.No --update_period 60000 --alias test.homeip.net,hash_for_host1
.No -a my.second.domain,hash2 --dyndns_system default@freedns.afraid.org
.Pp
The 'hash' should be extracted from the grab url batch file that can be
downloaded from the site. A single hashed (base64 encoded) string is
preferred upon a username and password pair, apparently to reduce the
computational resources that is required on their side. Unfortunately
the hash can not be computed by inadyn because it requires the index to
the username record in the freedns database, which is not known. The
simplest solution seems to be a copy&paste action from the grab url batch
file offered on their website. When the batch file looks is like
.Pp
.No graburl http://freedns.afraid.org/dynamic/update.php?YUGIUGSEIUFGOUIHEOIFEOIHJFEIO=
.Pp
the hash string, which is what the user should copy and paste, is the
string that begins right after the '?' character and ends with the end
of line. This string shell be used as the username in inadyn command.
When the user has several names then each name should be followed with
that name hash string.
.Sh OUTPUT
.Nm inadyn
prints a message when the IP is updated. If no update is needed then by
default it prints a single '.' character, unless \-\-verbose is set to 0.
Therefore, unless \-\-verbose is set to 0, the log file will contains lot
of dots. When the connection goes down it could be that
.Nm inadyn
will print some error messages. Those are harmless and should be
followed by 'OK' messages after the connection is back up.
.Sh SIGNALS
.Nm
responds to the following signals:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It HUP
Restarts
.Nm .
The configuration file is reread every time this signal is evoked.
.It TERM
Terminates
.Nm
gracefully.
.It INT
The same as TERM.
.It QUIT
The same as TERM.
.El
.Pp
For convenience in sending signals,
.Nm
writes its process ID to
.Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.pid
upon startup.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/tmp/pimd.cache -compact
.It Pa /etc/inadyn.conf
.It Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.cache
.It Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.pid
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.SS "Other manual pages"
.Xr inadyn.conf 5
.br
The
.Nm inadyn
home page is
.Ur
http://troglobit.com/inadyn.shtml
.Ue
.Sh AUTHOR
.Nm inadyn
was written by Narcis Ilisei <inarcis2002@hotpop.com>, Steve Horbachuk and later
Joachim Nilsson <troglobit@vmlinux.org>.
.Pp
This manual page was initially written for the
.Em Debian GNU/Linux
system by Shaul Karl <shaul@debian.org>. Later Joachim Nilsson picked up maintenance.
